We've got, uh, Shane Marsh here, chief Executive
of dos, uh, online.
Welcome, Shane. You've got 15 minutes.
If you can give us some introductory remarks.
Thank you for your written submission.
And then we'll go to questions. So, good morning.
Good morning. Thank you,
uh, for having me along this morning.
Uh, so, uh, we've got really two, uh, start my video,
two key elements of the update from DOS in terms of
how we are working to, uh,
improve competition in the the banking sector.
Uh, the first is that, um, DOS believes that to add value
to Kiwis, uh, in banking services, the best approach is
to build an integrated ecosystem.
Over the last year, we've added, uh, Westpac Visa,
and most recently, one New Zealand, uh,
to a broader ecosystem of, uh, organizations
that are working together to provide innovative
financial services to Kiwis.
The most recent one, uh,
one New Zealand launched a couple weeks ago.
Uh, it really is an, an innovation, uh, in New Zealand.
Uh, together we are offering, um, new value to customers,
um, not only in terms
of the financial services they receive, such as, uh, uh,
great interest rates, innovative, uh, uh, value in terms
of their home loans, uh, but also their card spend,
but also enabling customers to get a faster access
to the leading technology in terms of mobile phone devices,
uh, very new in the market.
Um, there's a number of instances offshore where
telecommunications works
with fintechs and banking providers.
Um, and there's been a lot of success from that as well.
So what we're doing in New Zealand is really looking at
how we can bring the best, uh, solutions
that have worked offshore to New Zealand to add better value
to Kiwis in New Zealand.
Um, the second topic is really around an update in terms
of the application we made to the Reserve Bank, uh,
for an application for a a banking license.
Um, if we kind of step back for a bit, um, was, uh,
originated out of, uh, Singapore, where myself,
my co-founder, we were working in a market that had a lot
of competition and banking, new services, innovation.
And we've seen that around the world, uh, from the UK
with the likes of Monzo
and in Australia, with the likes of UP bank, really bringing
new digital services, innovation and competition
and value to those, uh, countries and markets.
Our approach has always been
to look at what's working offshore
and how do we bring that to New Zealand
to offer better value in a market that, to be honest, has,
has fallen behind, um, what we're seeing, um,
been offered around the world.
The model that has been most successful in other countries
has been, uh, in a transactional bank model.
So a transactional bank model is where a new entrant offers,
uh, accounts payments, uh, cards
and savings to customers generally through, uh,
a mobile app, um,
and provides better value, um, better customer experience.
Um, and through that, the likes of Monzo have been able
to scale rapidly, regularly, win, um, bank
of the Year awards, um, and then look
and at time as they scale
and mature to add additional products.
One thing that they're not offering is lending.
With lending comes lending, uh, greater regulatory, uh,
burden, uh, greater risk and greater capital requirements.
So it really is a, is a easy path, um, to,
to scale a bank.
And it's that model that we, uh, propose to the Reserve Bank
that dos would adopt, um, in New Zealand, uh, to get a,
a banking license, and then we would look
to develop the business from there.
Um, we relied on the definition of a bank,
uh, in the, um, banking credential Division Act, uh,
specifically, um, clause, uh, 73 1,
which says that a bank consists of the borrowing
and lending of money or the provision
of other financial services or both.
And it was our interpretation
that other financial services would include what we deemed
to be kind of basic banking services, the type that your,
uh, 18-year-old might take when they've getting their first
job, which is, I need an account, I need
to have my wages paid in, I want,
might wanna save some money.
Um, and I wanna make some,
some payments perhaps on a, on a card.
Um, the Reserve Bank has declined that model.
Um, the Reserve Bank deemed that in New Zealand, uh,
their interpretation of the legislation is that, uh,
lending is a mandatory requirement
for banking in New Zealand.
Um, that's a different position than what we see overseas.
Um, and we see that that is,
is a relatively narrow
and restrictive interpretation, um, of the legislation.
Um, and it means that, uh, the transactional model for,
for new entrant in New Zealand is not a path, um,
to becoming a bank here in this, um, this country.
We respect the Reserve Bank in terms
of their interpretation and expertise.
We've continued to have dialogue with them, um,
and we continue to consider whether, uh,
what our best future model is.
Um, we're open to resubmitting, um,
and if we do so, that would be, um,
by meeting the lending requirement.
Um, but from our perspective, um,
we have a flourishing business.
We're adding real value to Kiwis.
Uh, we're growing and scaling with our partners,
and so the best way forward is really depending on what's
the most viable, uh, in this market, um, albeit the pathways
that have been successful overseas are not available here.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Marsh.
We're gonna go to our deputy chair, Ryan Hamilton.
Uh, thanks Shane. Good to see you.
And, um, good to see the progress you're making in, in this,
um, innovative space.
Yeah, disappointed, obviously
to hear about your news on the Reserve Bank.
I understand we had them in last week.
They're still working on that bank definition stuff,
so hopefully there'll be the opportunity for you to reapply.
Um, you mentioned your submission,
otherwise you might have to narrow
your, your business model.
What would that, what would that look like?
Is that quite prohibitive for you?
Well, I think the main reason what we applied
to be a bank is that, uh, with, uh, the bank, you,
because you're regulated by the Reserve Bank
and you've got the bank title of bank in your name,
it brings a degree of trust
and credibility that, uh, consumers in New Zealand
can rely on so that they can have confidence
that they can place their money and take services.
So we've been able to build that up, um, without that,
but without doubt having that as, um, something we can stand
behind so that we can compete in the banking market,
we can talk about offering banking services, um, would be,
uh, an advantage for us.
So that's really the restriction is, um,
there's obviously some restriction around some
of the products we can offer in terms of lending
and how we offer them, but, uh, the question is really,
can you get to the point of competing with the likes
of the top five banks, um, without that, um,
that position in the market.
Thank you. And also, obviously, your relationship
with One New Zealand, I assume has been, uh, helped the work
of this committee, the work of the government on
differentiating prepaid interchange pricings for fintechs.
Can you maybe talk a bit about that
and how that's looking and shaping up for you?
Yeah, absolutely. So when, uh, the,
the government was looking at, uh, interchange pricing,
there was, uh, we had submitted that, uh,
for the prepaid option that we offer.
Uh, the interchange we use, uh, we generate is used
to add value to customers and to further grow our business.
And so that pricing was left, um, as it was.
What we've been able to do is to use that
to offer a really strong, um, opposition
and proposition the market together with one
that effectively enables, uh, anyone who spends anyone
who has a card to save up over time to,
to generate their next, uh, phone upgrade.
And as we know in this market, with the cost
of living crisis, it's really tough for people to be able
to, uh, afford effectively a luxury item,
but as we know, so critical to being, uh,
in the leading position in terms of tech and,
and access to the, the latest, um, devices.
So look, it's a real big positive.
Um, we're super excited to be working one nz.
They're a really customer focused organization,
and we think this has, uh, got great, um,
growth opportunities. Fantastic.
Okay. Thank you. Okay, thank you.
We're gonna go to, um, uh, Dr. Deborah Russell.
Yeah. Um, I'm just, uh, kind of a little bit puzzled.
I, I've missed something somewhere,
but I'm looking at your app and your website,
and it does say you offer home loans.
Yeah, sorry. So we, um,
are effectively offering a broking service, um, exclusively
with, uh, Westpac, uh, who's our, our partner in that.
So, um, so effectively the offer is that if you,
uh, take a, uh, home loan through dos,
so we organize your home loan with Westpac, you'll get kind
of the, the great rates and any cash back
that may be available offered by Westpac.
But in addition to that, you get a free, um,
iPhone 17 effectively.
So it's a, um, it's a minute innovative,
but, um, amazing offer in the market
that we just launched two weeks ago.
Right. Okay. So, but, and so,
but that's not gonna be enough to meet that borrowing
and lending of money criterion
In itself.
'cause Westpac is doing the actual
lending. You're just brokering.
Yeah. So it could always be an option for us to bring
that in house, um, and to, to lend.
That's where a lot of the complexity, uh, comes about.
It's access to low cost funding.
It's the capital requirements that re relate to that
and the risk, um, policies
and management that comes on top of that.
So that's, that's all possible.
Um, but it's quite a lot of complexity
and burden to take on that is we believe, not necessary
to be offering banking services.
Um, and the way in which, uh, we've, um,
approached it from a more of a transactional perspective.
Okay. Thank you. Okay. Any further questions? Yeah.
Yes. Uh, Dr. David Wilson. Uh,
Thanks Shane. Really
good, uh, presentation. Thank you very much for that.
Just, uh, wondering, do you offer your clients, um,
transactional services internationally?
So can you transfer money for them to other places?
And if so, how?
Yeah, so you can use your, um, card
to make purchases if you're overseas, um,
and you make purchases online,
but we don't have international payments.
Yeah. Uh, offering with dos, um, I was once the head
of international payments for the major bank,
so it's a business I know very well.
Um, however, it does come with a degree of, um, risk.
Um, and that's, so that's something that's on our pipeline.
But's, not something that we've rolled out at this stage.
Thank you. One Very quick.
Yes. Yep. No, we've got time. Just
One very quick, because I'm
looking at your, thanks, Shane.
We appreciate you being here. Um, you just put in,
in your responses in your presentation that, um, you didn't,
that the Reserve Bank said you didn't meet the capital
requirements 'cause of the $5 million.
Was that directly linked to the fact that they wanted you
to be doing lending so your capital requirements would be
a whole lot higher?
Or is that a, is
that just another reason they declined your application?
Yeah, I have really good questions
because the, the primary reason for, um,
the application not being approved was
because of the lack of lending
and it didn't meet the business activities of a bank
as they, they, um, interpreted.
There was, um, some secondary, um, notes
and the secondary notes was that the capital
that we proposed was not sufficient.
We didn't go into that in detail,
but to, um, for others there's a $30 million
initial capital requirement.
There's been some discussion about that being lowered,
especially I think for lower risk, um, entities,
we propose 5 million.
Um, there has been talk between being five and 10 million,
but that 5 million proposal was declined.
Okay. Thank you. That's very helpful.
'cause I think there's some things we can follow up. Yeah.
Okay. Anyone else? No. Okay. Thank you Mr. Marsh from dos.
We appreciate your, uh, written submission and appearing
before the committee, um, six months
after we reported back on the banking inquiry. Great.
Thanks. Along 2020.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay.
Members, that leads us to kiwibank
and we've got the chief executive
and chair here, so, so, um, welcome, uh,
Susan Peterson and Steve, uh, Mina.
Good morning, marina.
Thank you for joining us this morning and, uh,
and rolling with our, um, timetabling.
I'm very happy to do so. Can we leave it at that? Yeah.
Anyway, good morning. We're in your hands.
Uh, we've got your submission if you're able
to give us some, um, introductory remarks,
and then we'll crack into some questions. Thank
You. Yeah, no, thank you. And
Marina, um, good morning
to everybody and thank you chair
and thank you members of the committee for, um,
inviting us here to speak today.
We welcome this opportunity
and I really wanna make it clear
that we very much support your work
to increase competition in this country.
Um, in terms of, we've taken your lead in terms
of res, um, responding
with some very succinct answers to your questions.
We, but we welcome the opportunity really to open that up,
um, in any way you wanna take it forward.
I just wanted to say, look, it's
obvious I'm new to Kiwibank.
Um, I'm also new to Kiwi Group Capital.
I was appointed to both boards early in December and,
but I'm not new to financial services.
And in terms of making that quite clear,
I've had a long history at A NZ.
I've also been on the board of a SB
and more broader, more broadly in
terms of financial services.
I've seen institutional banking, institutional equities,
and private wealth management through Craig's.
I've also been on the board of Xero
for coming up nine years.
So I understand FinTech
and I understand how that fits together.
So why Kiwi Bank?
Um, I couldn't be more attracted
to the purpose right now for our country.
The idea of Kiwi making kiwi better off really resonates.
It resonates probably with us all in this room
and looking forward to leaning in
and having a few more folk of it lean into this opportunity
to maximize and optimize the opportunity ahead of this,
of this company for our country.
So I wasn't really gonna say anything more than that.
Um, but otherwise, hand it over to Steve in terms of taking,
taking the questions that we've got
and any, any inquiry you've got for, for us, just
Welcome to the committee's questions. Oh,
Thank you. Thank you. We're
gonna go to Barbara Edmonds.
Yeah, good morning. And welcome.
Um, just given your introductory comments
and you do come into Kiwibank with some fresh eyes.
Yes. What do you see are the opportunities
or the opportunities that you know,
that you're currently working through, where
in particular your skillset in the FinTech area, how
that can help Kiwi Bank advance their competition
with the big banks?
Yeah, and it's a, it is a great question.
I mean, the re the, the opportunity that I see here
for Kiwi Bank is sort of, there's three growth vectors
that sit in the operating side of the company.
One is to grow, so to help more kiwi with, um,
their kiwi living needs
and finding a way to, to deliver on that.
The second one is making sure that, um, you know, we can,
you know, continue to attract the support we need
to be able to inform that growth.
And then how can we run our bank in a way
that is operationally efficient,
that really push pressures on,
on margins from the other banks.
And I think among all those three growth vectors,
I see opportunities specifically for FinTech.
One of those opportunities, I guess, is to use technology
to democratize access to more, um, features and facilities
and products for more Kiwi.
Um, but that can be us doing it,
but it can be partnering it, it can be networks,
it can be done and to scale up in a way that doesn't rely us
to do everything, but we can still give
access to Kiwi to more. Yeah.
And, um, Steve, more for you,
obviously the capital requirement rules have, um,
had a significant impact for Kiwi Bank.
Um, you say in your, um, the memo
to the select committee in the short
term, or is it medium term?
What, um, can you just explain why just the short term and,
and what would you need to look for to have a bit more, um,
certainty for the medium
and longer term in relation to capital requirements? Yeah,
I mean, we are very positive about the changes.
I think they reflect a long held view
that the playing field hadn't been level level one.
Uh, and so for smaller players,
we had suffered significant disadvantage
under the previous capital rule.
So I think there has been a, you know,
really positive step towards leveling it.
There's still, um, there's still some gaps that I,
I don't follow the logic in.
Um, so from, from a couple of areas.
One is, um, if you believe that
the internal models of the Big four banks are
so much more superior than the standardized approach
to capital, it's very hard to understand why
Kiwibank carries half the impairments
of any of the big four.
Mm-hmm. You know, so we are 40% of a N Z's impairments
and 60% of the average of the big four.
So I don't, I don't think it stands true to say
that it's safer or that the risk is different if we were to,
you know, lend to you versus one of the others.
So I think that is a step in the right direction.
I think under the, um, um,
as we said in our answers under the depositors compensation
scheme, where there is a, there's a sort of a weird window
where if things don't change, we will be complying
with the previous capital rules under the depositors
compensation scheme rather than the new rules.
Okay. That will see us carrying more capital,
even though we are meeting the requirements
and exceeding the requirements.
So I don't think that's, the logic doesn't flow to me,
but that might be underway and, and gonna be changed.
I think. I think the second thing is the, you know,
there's some other technical elements,
but I won't use the committee's time on that.
So look, positive steps in the right direction.
I think the relief that, um, comes from a better view
of risk weighted assets
and the capital requirements means
that we have about either $20 billion
of home loans we could do,
or sort of cir $7 billion
of business banking, or a mix of both.
Um, that would certainly give us really good, clear runway
for the next two or three years, Barbara.
But after that, I think, you know, logically,
Kiwi Group Capital and other stakeholders would be asking
us, what does the future look like?
And we don't want you to slow, uh, your growth
because the above market growth means that,
we'll, you be eating into that.
Okay. Okay. I'm Gonna go Todd Stevenson. Uh, just
A couple of questions from me.
Um, uh, I just wanna push,
I'm pushing all the bank shareholders of, um,
payments New Zealand a bit harder.
No, thanks. I know. Thanks for coming by the way,
first, and thanks for responses.
Sure. But, um, I mean, you basically just said, look,
they're carrying out some work, they're gonna do something.
Um, you know, and again, I know it's a difficult
'cause you're obviously a, a user
and a shareholder of payments New Zealand,
but, you know, where do you think they're at?
Can they be pushed a bit harder to kind of, um,
overhaul their governance
and really open up what they're doing
and Yeah. What's your views on
That, really? Yeah, look, I, I
think the views are that they're very awake
to the fact that there is, the world is changing fast.
Um, and that they need to change with the times.
I mean, the, the, it's a bit of a conundrum with payments
because you want 'em to be this most stable
and the most safe thing you can do,
as everyone on the committee will understand.
You also understand that, um,
customer's expectations are real time.
What has been very unusual in the last couple
of years has been for, certainly for the length
of time I've been in banking more than 25 years,
we have been trying to take friction out of payments.
Mm-hmm. And in the last two years,
we're putting friction back into payments.
Mm-hmm. Confirmation of payee and,
and phishing and, and scams.
So, um, I think all of us are facing into,
you know, a balancing act.
Um, I think it's very difficult to, um,
be adaptable
and agile when you've got such a broad range
of stakeholders and, and shareholders.
Look, not everyone's on the same page. Yeah.
So, look, I think there's work to do,
certainly my conversation.
Um, and, um, with the previous chair with, um,
payments New Zealanders, we hear the public's voice loud
and clear that we need to change and adjust.
Obviously we try and push that with our voice,
but we're not the biggest player at the table.
Um, we think that the opening up and modernization,
because we are, you know, sort of two thirds of the way
or halfway through our transformation,
we'd like to see that accelerate.
So our view would be, you know, um,
modernizing getting a clear roadmap of what that looks like
and, and bringing some new capability to the mixes
as much required.
So, and then just my other quick one was, um, you kind
of touched on it, your transformation.
Obviously you're not quite, um, subject to open banking yet,
but it's coming up pretty soon.
Yeah. How's, how's your transformation going?
Are you gonna be ready for open
banking? Just a quick update.
Yeah, absolutely. We're gonna meet our deadlines.
Um, you know, we are, we are, puffing is a good way
to say we're, we're running pretty hard.
So we will be delivering, uh, on the 29th of May for, uh,
you know, one June deadline.
So if you, I mean, the nature of why we've had
to do it the way we are is because we are basically changing
and transforming basically wing to wink at the bank.
Mm-hmm. If we had built into the previous technology,
we would've had to rip it out and put it back in.
That doesn't make any sense at all
what I would say the outcomes of open banking
and what you would hope for.
I mean, Kiwibank has been offering a FinTech connection
for lending since 2019.
We are up for being more open
and as the smallest player, we, we are a net beneficiary.
So all it is is just a logical sense.
And I think I've told the committee previously, you know,
if you're a homeowner, you wouldn't repaint the part
of the house you're about to demolish.
And that's really just the simple logic, which is, you know,
we will be ready to go.
Um, I think we are gonna be in a, an advantage in a sense,
which is, we're coming a little bit later,
we can see what's unfolding.
The platform partner we've chosen, um, I think is
in a more modern and contemporary technology architecture
than the previous, um, iteration of open banking.
That's not, um, that's not to be critical
of the big banks 'cause they had to go sooner.
So they've had to connect to 40-year-old technology.
And I'm sure you'll hear from the big banks later on,
that's not a very pleasant experience to try
and make modern tech.
Talk to some of the, you know, I know firsthand from one
of the banks that that call
that they're talking about is 40 years old.
Thank you. Okay. So we're on the
1st of June. Mm-hmm. Uh, we're gonna go to,
Um, Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you. Just, um, two questions. One of them very quick.
Um, Steve, you talked about some technical changes
that you won't, um, thank you.
Um, but, um, in terms of that ability, um, around the,
the $20 billion growth in the, the home lender
or in the personal banking, 7 billion in business banking,
are there any tweaks that can be made within those technical
changes that we need to be aware of that would even
increase that pool?
I think the gap between, um,
us using standardized risk wa weighted assets
and the way that the big banks are able
to use their internal models
still does give them an advantage.
It's a much reduced advantage.
So I don't wanna seem ish about the, you know,
how we've moved, but there is still a gap there, which,
you know, an asset is an asset and its risk is its risk.
So I think there's still that gap there.
I think importantly for us,
the deposit is compensation scheme is the one
that we really do need to have focus on.
Because if we can't,
if we are at a disadvantage via the levy, means
that we will not be as competitive as we need to be overall,
or we won't be, um, as competitive as we need
to be in attracting deposits.
If we can't attract the deposits, then our cost
of funding is higher and we are less competitive.
You know, that's obviously the way that it unfolds.
And so I think that is really important that, um, the risk
for the depositors is reflected in the,
in the way that the levy works.
So that's the, that's the one I would like to focus
On. So does the,
the, the, the committee, the kites,
do they have the details of this? Yeah, they
Do. Yep.
Fabulous. So that, that would be good.
'cause it is those technical things we are looking for.
The other thing is on your scheme. Yep.
Um, thank you for doing that.
I think it's got the potential to unlock a huge amount
of possibility in New Zealand.
Um, what's the kind of growth you are seeing across that?
Yeah, look, it's, um,
it's a slower burn than we would hope for.
Yeah. Um, we certainly get a lot of inquiry.
What we, what we're really focused on now is we feel like
we've got the right policy
and the right infrastructure in play.
Now. It's about getting a couple of hundred
or, you know, two, 300 lenders in our business
really familiar with how it works.
Because often a a banker may only see
that opportunity once every six months.
Yeah. Yeah. They're not as familiar
as they can be about, oh, I remember how it works.
I'm, I'm very hopeful that, um, this is where, you know,
the use of, uh, a new generation of technology around AI
that can assist the lenders
and borrowers will mean that our borrowers a lot more
comfortable and a lot more confident about what they offer.
Because, you know, like anything in life,
if you're only doing it once every six months,
you're not just confident as you could be.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, so we are working really hard in the Maori,
um, part of our business, the team there.
We've changed the leadership model there
with a very experienced commercial
and retail lender to lead that business.
Um, I'm very confident that Wayne has got the skills
to really drive the awareness.
So I think we've got an awareness issue
more than a policy issue.
Sure. Um, but we can do a lot more.
Um, and I was really struck with, um, a couple
of things I've attended late last year
that there's such a big opportunity.
It's the fastest growing youngest generation of Al Tiera.
So the opportunity is very big for, for banks
and all financial services providers.
Um, but we sort of need to get out of our own way a bit, um,
and think differently about,
particularly about Maori freehold land Yeah.
Which is, uh, an underutilized
asset and liberate a lot of capital.
So yeah, I think all of it, all of the banks would,
would give you the answer that
we can do more and we should do more. Yeah.
I mean, for, for years the government had sitting there
as, you know, an ability to give home grants Yeah.
Based on, and it just couldn't be utilized.
No, that's right. Yeah. Um, so it is hugely, one
of the things I'm interested in.
Do you see the potential in that
through individuals being able to use, uh, to be able to,
um, borrow against the, uh, Eno Maori, um, assets.
Mm-hmm. There, there's, there's shares in that,
or do you see there's also an opportunity for, um,
larger groups of people whanau to, to develop Papa Kaga
and to use it as more of a collective? I think
Economically the answers both.
Yeah. Okay. I mean, I think we, we just have
to be a lot more flexible about the way that we approach it.
And I, and I actually think as you think about, um,
you know, many situations where a lender
and a bank is lending to someone, you know,
for instance, the school Yeah.
You have to realistically understand
that you're not gonna enforce the security.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. That's not the reason
that you are lending someone that money,
but banks are wired to do whatever is the, you know,
fits the box and fits the policy most easily.
So I think, you know, it's, it's very fair
that the committee challenges is all to look at
that differently and to take a different approach.
I mean, no one is more invested in the reputation
and support and security of that eno than, than Iwi
and the multi-generational approach.
The problem with banks typically think quarters and months.
Yeah. Not years and generations.
And so I think that's a challenge that
quite rightly the committee would give
us. I'm just gonna go to a
Think. Thank you
Dr. Woods.
I'm gonna go to us up from the
honorable Barbara Redmonds. Thank
You. Just, yeah. Keeping on
the same topic, um, a anecdotally,
uh, what I'm observing when I speak to particularly ua,
uh, um, hapu, you know, hapu so,
or families that are actually basically trying to
sort out their land, is that not necessarily
that the banks are, um, banks are ready to lend
because you've set up your framework,
but actually for them to get to that point
and to structure their own affairs, including the fact
that the succession rules are so difficult for them
to set up a trust, that's what I'm here,
what I'm observing anecdotally,
and yeah, I've had a number of particular cases like that.
Is that, uh, is that something
that your lenders are observing as well?
Is that they're coming to you saying, we've got land?
Yeah. But that's about it. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, the, the ownership structure is,
is challenging, as you say.
Yeah. I also think there's probably, um, on the banker side
of the table, there's not a clear appreciation of, of
that complexity when you start.
Yeah. And so as it unfolds, you might think that the,
the shape and the, and the arrangements are reasonably clear
and they get more complex and they unfold that way.
Mm-hmm. Um, I certainly know from a commercial lending
perspective, I've been in situations
where we've thought we've had agreement and, and unity,
and then it's changed over time.
So I think that's, you know, that's natural as well.
Um, so yes is the answer.
Um, I think we could do more around, um, maybe
as an NZBA level or some coalition level to try
and help people
and support people to give them a more of a framework
and a pathway to how ownership could be clarified.
Um, but I think realistically there has
to be done in partnership with Hapu.
I think we haven't done well when we've tried to, you know,
look, this is the way we think it should work
and, and, and take this.
And I mean, I I I think the other part
of the equation is the Maori Land Corps
and the fact that there are a lot of delays in there
for those that wanting to get the interview.
Yeah. I think more resourcing there would
de definitely help in a system. Very good.
We're gonna go to Dan bid. Thank you Steve
and, uh, Susan for joining us today.
Um, in your response to submission
around the regulatory overlap,
you've put a note here about ensuring there are dis uh,
there are discipline boundaries
between their respective
responsibilities of all the regulators.
Mm-hmm. Um, clearly there are a lot of regulators
and overlaps and responsibilities.
Um, my question to you is, uh, are, is kiwibank able
to proactively provide areas of opportunity
reducing those overlaps to the council
of financial regulators?
Or how, how do you give
that upward feedback to me carefully?
Um, it's, it is a, it is a great question.
They, we feel like we give the feedback
pretty loud and clear.
Yes. Um, we have a very detailed schematic
of the amount that's on the go, and it's overlaps.
Um, and it's certainly enough
to give you a migraine when you look at it.
Um, the challenge we find ultimately is
I think there's a good intention to prevent the overlap.
The, the difficulty I think we reach is that the,
the people that are pursuing the particular regulation do
not want to take aback, would step to someone else.
Mm. Which ultimately what is, what stops the conflict,
which is who is the primary owner
and what is the primary thing that we are trying
to do in financial services.
And, and what we find is that we have ministries
and regulators, um, who are
and conceptually agree
that there could be better sequencing,
but practically don't wanna,
don't want to give up their slot. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. I mean, being pretty direct there,
but that's, that's what, that's the experience that we live.
That's great. And another question, um, we have been kind
of quizzing banks around the, um, speed of which they flow
through OCR reductions or increases.
Yep. We do have an OCR announcement today,
but, uh, have just noticed that, um, you, uh,
Kiwi banks, uh, speed of reduction through
to new customers is really good.
So about five days the last OC announcement,
but for, uh, existing customers,
it's about 19 days. Is there
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I'm, I'm actually pleased you asked
because this is a paid broadcast from kiwibank now.
So, um, so we've had the joint
or the lowest, uh, interest rate in 2025
for the 12 month home loan.
92% of the time for two years.
We've had it 52% of the time
for the 180 t 180 day term deposit, where 84%
of the time we've had the leading rate.
And for two 70 day we've had a 80% of the weeks.
And so, um, I think that we can stand proud with our rate.
I do think that the one quirk that I'd, I'd point you
to is it depends where you start from.
Mm-hmm. Um, so the speed of the pass
through certainly needs scrutiny.
And I think that the,
the committee putting scrutiny on the pass through for,
for savers and borrowers makes a lot of sense.
And I think, you know, we should welcome that scrutiny.
Mm-hmm. I do think the one thing I'd say
is, depends where you start from.
'cause if I have 35 points higher
and I drop 25 today, the customers are still 10 behind
what they would've been for another rate.
So that's the, that's the nuance to it.
Um, but I think visibility is the best panacea for this.
So how long is it taking, where it's getting passed through?
Look, and I mean, everyone should be
here explaining that to the public.
And I think the committee's serving
its purpose when it does that.
Um, right.
But I think there is a little bit more to it. Okay. Thank
You, Steve. Uh, just a
question from me. Business banking was one
of your standout categories that you reported on last year.
How's it looking, um, this year
and have you with the updated capital settings, uh,
are you comfortable that you've got the capacity to maximize
that growth, uh, you know, to, to FY 30?
You thank you chair? I mean yes is the answer to it.
I think what we are, we, we've certainly
outgrown the market system.
So, you know, we've definitely out competed, um,
the other banks and, you know,
the most recent result was asbs result.
Growing 20 basis points, we will have grown
five or six times that.
So proportionately growing much faster
off a much smaller base.
What we're finding, probably the headwind we're facing
is business confidence.
So people willing to make the investment to, you know,
take on hiring people, you know,
invest in the capital equipment.
We've got a very strong pipeline,
but getting people to the next stage
to actually make the decision to draw down is proving to be,
you know, tougher than it has been.
So look, I think we are creeping towards a recovery,
but slower than I would've hoped.
But, you know, we're well positioned to support it.
It's the number one growth area and opportunity we've got.
Uh, we are building out the capability we can,
um, as fast as we can.
Um, we've got the people in the front line
that can do the deals
and we've got the balance sheet to do it.
We just need to make sure that customers are confident. Mm.
And open banking that will, how will that, um, how will
that comfort, uh, the business lending and, and support it?
Yeah, I mean, as I sort of touched on, since 2019,
customers have had the ability to answer eight questions,
you know, upload their zero feed
and get a decision within minutes up to a million dollars.
And so that's the market leading capability.
So I think we stand ready to, to lend the money.
I think open banking reduces friction.
Uh, and I think as you know, more
and more New Zealand small businesses are on
a platform like zero.
They, as long as the bank technology can ingest that,
then it's easier for the customers to borrow if that's
what they wanna do, or it's easier for them
to optimize their money.
And I think that's probably the, the other area
that we don't talk about much, which is, you know,
customers are, are much more conscious than they have been
for a long time of trying to make sure
that their money is working for them.
And so I think the technology can provide a situation where,
you know, you can have a virtual CFO making sure
that your deposits are well looked after.
I think having the ability to move money through banks
for smaller businesses, which is quite tricky.
And, and not your day job.
If you're a plumber or an electrician out on the road,
you know, she will be able to set herself up that, you know,
she can have an agent making sure that across her two
or three banks, she's getting the best return
for her money as it comes through.
If it's helpful. I, I can probably just add two seconds
worth of what we can sort of see from,
um, the FinTech platform.
We see over half small businesses in
New Zealand through the zero platform.
So we can see, so, so working through what are the things
that provide them with confidence, we can see that access
to capital is one
of the things, you know, can I make payroll?
Can I, can I make my, um, well,
can I make payroll is really the biggest one.
Can I pay my rent? Um,
and can I pay, you know, paying my people?
So having those insights into the jobs that have to be done
for our small businesses and then finding the we,
the main means to power it up to be, to solve
for those solutions is the opportunity.
And I don't see it as a massively difficult
unlock to be perfectly honest.
Um, we're just gotta look at it from
the small business perspective.
Okay. We we're over time, but we session here
and we've got no status to finish.
Really Dr. Megan Woods,
Just, um, just wondering whether you have any plans to,
to move into the space around the, the loans around solar
and energy efficiency that, uh, for home loans that the big,
some of the big four are offering at low or 0% interest.
Great data out this week showing that actually we can,
can now actually map the capital increase in property.
Yeah. Um, against those upgrades.
Certainly. Um, certainly try to be as flexible
as we can be about supporting those.
We aren't in a position where we are, you know,
we've got the balance sheet to be able to, you know,
sacrifice a hundred million or $200 million
with the lending to support that.
I think that is, um, that's one of the great advantages
that big banks should bring.
And so it's great, you know, we can play a,
a smaller part in it, but if I stand back at from an in as,
as an industry, I think everyone would agree it's a better
and safer property when it's powered and,
and it's got better efficiency.
So I think the industry does a good job.
We're probably never gonna be a major player.
Um, but we can make sure that all
of our customers do get the right intentions.
We've got clear sustainability goals
and how much we wanna lend into sustainable finance.
Um, that'll always be a subset of
what a big bank can do. Mm-hmm.
So the data this week showed 1.34%, um,
uptake in capital value.
Yeah. Which is great to actually start tracking that.
Yep. Very much so.
Okay, thank you. We're gonna final question.
Um, or observation? Ryan Hamilton? No, I was just
Saw, I saw yesterday, uh, something about Apple Pay
and you guys are connected with Apple Pay and that,
but then that's been there for a while, so, so I'm thinking
that was an old article, but Yep. Yeah.
Yeah. I'm thankful for that there.
I never have to answer one of those questions again.
Yeah, Yeah. Yeah. For a
long, long time that was a big problem for
Us. Yeah. Thanks for the work you're
doing in the space.
Really appreciate coming back to
Okay. We're just, David
Wilson's protesting over here. So
The corner, my eye, David wanted to say something.
Yeah. Look, um, declaration of interest,
so I'm avoiding anything to do with scams and the like,
because the engagement I had was
with Kiwibank in terms of being a receiving bank. So now
We're interested Yeah. Declaration
Of Interest for everybody.
So my question is really interested in your policy
extension bound making a proposal to clang,
or can you explain some of that?
I think that's really encouraging.
Yeah. I mean, I think for us that we recognize
that why we had made some good strides, um, we just need
to be more aggressive about, um, understanding
what would make it more attractive
and what would broaden its reach.
Um, and so, you know,
we've got a clear support from our board
around the risk appetite that we've got for it.
Um, so I think, you know, that the,
the unlock from the bank side is there now we just need
to make sure that all the parties are really clear about
how we make it as simple and as easy as we can. Yeah, I
Like that you were looking at shared
equity and rent to buy,
Which goes to a lot of questions that Megan
and yeah, I think we're just still be way more flexible
about our, the borrower just thinking about coming together,
uh, in a, in a co-ownership basis or,
or who else can support.
Okay. Thank you. No, that was a great session.
So thank you Jenny, we bank. Thank you, Steve.
Thank you Susan for coming in today. Thanks.
Thanks very much for your time. Thanks time. All the best.
Okay. That now brings us to the non-bank deposit takers.
Um, and we've got a hybrid presentation today.
Have we, Liam?
We need Steve,
do you wanna go on the future question?
Okay. Good morning.
If you're able to, uh, introduce your, um, colleagues,
we've got your submission, um,
and, uh, we look forward to, uh, your presentation
and, and, and some interaction.
Sure. Uh, Koto, um, called John Healy ua.
I'm the Chief executive from the Wire Upper
Building Society, um,
and with, with me this morning online is Daniel McGraw,
the Chief executive of X exceed a Finance.
Daniel Good
Morning committee and thank you chair.
Um, apologies I can't be with you in New Zealand.
Had other plans
This morning.
Um, as, as John said, I, I'm the CEO of, um,
exceed Finance, and John
and I are representing today the non-Bank Deposit
Takers Association.
So John, and I'll just give a short overview and,
and as you mentioned chair, you have our, our submission
N TTS operate predominantly in niches of the banking system
as we've, um, as we've appeared
before you, um, previously and talked about.
So we are predominantly serving those that are underserved
by the main banks and, and the sort of second tier banks.
And because of our size, we feel as though we're, um,
acutely aware of regulatory impost on our businesses.
So we differ very differently to non-bank lenders,
to fintechs, to investment trusts in
that we undertake deposit taking activities
and are directly over, uh, have oversight
by the Reserve Bank.
So for, for the record on behalf of the NBDT members,
we support all prudential recommendations made
by the committee in the report.
While financial stability is a critical objective,
however, we feel it must be balanced against competition
efficiency and financial inclusion.
For NBDs, the key issue is not the existence
of Prudential standards, which we fully support.
It's whether they reflect the actual systemic risk posed
by smaller institutions such as ourselves.
So there's two points in that regard I'd like to make.
Firstly, we do acknowledge progress is happening
and we, um, appreciate the efforts
of the Reserve Bank in engagement with our sector.
We now hold quarterly meet meetings with the Reserve Bank,
and to the extent any submissions are required, we're able
to have individual workshops with the Reserve Bank.
But progress does take time in understanding our sector
because we do play a niche part in the market.
And although many of the decisions
regarding the core capital requirements have largely been
made, we consider it's important that the application
of proportionality be continued
to be considered throughout all future
regulations and standards.
So that's a core principle of our group.
For example, the recent review on the capital risk weight
did contain benefits to the non-bank deposit taker sector,
which we appreciate.
But when you look at the overall capital requirements,
the group one and group two banks had their requirements,
their capital requirements, that is reduced in the review.
Whereas group three,
the MBD ts the capital ratio was left unchanged.
Secondly, the amount of regulatory change and the,
and the pure volume of consultation materials and,
and impending compliance is a big burden on our sector,
given our size and given the size of our management teams
and compliance teams.
And that's essentially time
that we're not spending on innovation growth
and serving our customers.
We also note approaches in the UK with strong
and simple framework used for smaller banks
and building societies, and also the regulatory regime
that's been recently announced
for non-significant financial institutions in Australia,
both of which have been cited as ways to simplify
Prudential regulation
and to foster small ba uh,
competition in the small bank sector.
So John, I'll hand over to you.
Thanks, Daniel. Um, so overall I'd say we're, we're,
you know, through a lot of hard work.
I think, um, there are areas where we're very happy
with progress for, um, the non-bank deposit takers.
So one example is around the depositor compensation scheme.
So it came in on the 1st of July,
and a good example of regulation
that struck the right balance between compliance obligations
and competitive benefit.
Um, and so the larger deposit base that this creates for,
um, non-bank deposit takers will lead
to a lower cost of funding.
And so we can then be more competitive in the
market with the bigger players.
Um, and transitioning to the Deposit Takers Act,
which will become our lives from 2028, it means a lot
of work for us smaller players,
and we don't have sizable legal
and compliance teams like the big banks.
Um, but that said, um, we've worked, um, well
with the Reserve Bank, um, and we've communicated and,
and the engagement has been very good
and they've been very accessible.
So they've run quarterly working groups
and ad hoc sessions as requested.
So that's a positive sign.
Um, one particular area on payments infrastructure
to point out that we are still working on is
around the exchange settlement account system, which, uh,
most of us don't have access to.
Um, historically it was just the larger players
that had access to this,
but positively, um, the Reserve Bank and, and,
and us are working together on getting something
that later this year, um, should be more feasible for us to,
um, to have.
So, um, really
before I hand back to Daniel two,
like three main recommendations, one,
we really strongly support the committee's intention
to continue six monthly reviews.
We are not there yet there on better banking competition.
And your ongoing oversight, um, is really important
to achieve accountability.
Um, and so that there's input on proportionality,
competitiveness and regulatory issues.
We urge, uh, you to continue to, um, oversee
how the Reserve Bank is balancing competition
and financial stability and practice, including metrics
or indicators that demonstrate competitive outcomes.
And by the same token, we urge you to also, um, um,
oversee how the financial markets authority conducts
regulation and fair conduct obligations
that are applied in a way that supports, um, competition.
Daniel.
Yeah, thanks John. So look, in summary as,
as we've just outlined, we've seen several encouraging
developments, um,
and acknowledged the efforts of the regulators.
Um, however, for our sector,
really we wanna just con continue to see transparency
and the application of proportionality.
And, and I think we see that in other jurisdictions
for small banking sector
where proportionality plays a big role in the
development of the small bank sector.
And secondly, structured follow up we think will be
essential to translating the inquiries findings into
lasting competition.
So thank you and welcome. Any questions?
Oh, very good. You raised the issue of, uh, engagement
with the Commerce Commission since its market study.
Uh, can you give us a, um, a rundown or, or
or summation of how that, have you reached out
to the Commerce Commission?
What has been the level of engagement post-market study
with your association and members?
We, we Have, I, if you, I I'm just trying
to get a sense if you're calling for engagement,
you've obviously not had success,
Uh, in, in relation to the Commerce commission.
We have, look, we have had engagement with them.
Um, since the market study,
we haven't had a huge amount of follow up.
Um, we continue to do so.
It's not through a lack of, I don't think, um, um,
effort from the, from the Commerce
Commission to be honest chair.
I think it's, there's been a lot going on in relation
to the DTA in relation to this particular inquiry.
So we continue our efforts to engage with, you know,
all three regulators really.
Um, and there's a bit more work to be done, um, with the,
with ComCom, um, but we'll continue to reach out to them.
Very good. And, uh, with the financial policy committee,
we had the Reserve Bank in last week, uh, they've got their,
um, charter sorted.
They're lining up their first meetings and agenda.
Uh, what would you like to see at the top of that agenda
for the re prudential policy?
Policy
As, as John mentioned, I think it's very important for us,
you know, one of the key tenets for us is
around proportionality.
'cause that is the thing that we believe will help us grow.
So what we'd like to see is regular feedback on how
that proportionality is being applied in practice.
That's very important for us
because if you just take, for example,
the non-core standards that are, um, gonna be rolled out,
you know, through to 2028, there's a huge amount
of detail in that and a huge amount of work
that would be required for us and all deposit takers.
Um, and so for example, you know,
how is proportionality being applied to all
of those core ran all non-core standards?
Um, so it's, it, it's a lot
of the devil's in the detail on those type of issues.
And so we're really keen to see what that policy committee,
um, decides with a tangible results.
Very good. We're gonna go to Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah, thank you guys for, uh, really important part
of the market and, um, and very interesting submission.
Um, Daniel, you mentioned some overseas
policy, uh, advancements.
Can you e elucidate on some of those
that could be applicable to us?
Um, in the UK
and Australia, they've, they've both adopted a, um, for,
for new entrants, they've adopted a, a standard whereby, um,
effectively it is a period of time when a deposit taker can,
um, uh, enter the market.
And so in Australia, for example,
they call it a restricted regime where, um,
there are certain capital uh, rules that make it easier
for them to enter the market and try and become profitable
and get their business models.
Now we haven't, we haven't got that in, in this particular,
um, regime, but that's a very good example.
Another example, in the UK they have open banking a lot
more advanced than what we have.
We do acknowledge there are efforts of open banking coming
through the market, and certainly, um, it's very encouraging
to see the big banks adopting that.
And that will be a big part of how we can compete
and offer customers, um, better, better services
by access to those data.
Uh, a final example might be in the case of Australia,
and we pointed this in out submission.
There was a lower cap, you know, there was a,
there was a 10.5% capital ratio, um,
which is lower than ours, um,
for those non-significant financial institutions.
So there just a few examples specifically,
but there is a general theme of those two jurisdictions
where they are talking about being actively
encouraging competition in the market
from the smaller banks.
Thank you, Dan. Okay.
You, you say, uh, Daniel, that
and, um, John, that the, uh,
non-bank deposit takers are beginning
to see renewed lending opportunities.
What, what is that looking like, uh,
in the marketplace going into 2026?
Well, for us, in terms of lending,
there's more positivity in terms of the outlook of
businesses and generally people.
So we've seen some increase in loan demand, uh,
towards the back end of 2025.
It's probably still not
rushing away in terms of that positivity,
but that is, that is good
and that is good for the region as well.
I guess it's a bit like a lot of what is heard about, well,
what will happen with the OCR today.
There's positive news
and there's risks that are sitting out there.
So it's sort of balanced, but,
but good enough for us to be, um, um, a bit busier, um,
and to see and positive to see
that loan demand coming through for us.
Okay. Daniel, do you have a comment on that?
Yeah, look, 1, 1, 1 area where we have, um,
been encouraged to see is the bringing forward
of the risk ratings and the amendment of the risk ratings,
which applies across the whole sector.
But for, uh, non-bank deposit takers,
it does open up the opportunity for us to do, for example,
business lending where we might
otherwise not have done so
under the previous non bank deposit takers regime,
we had a higher risk weight applicable to us.
So that is a change that we're all exploring
and could be, you know, much more beneficial
for the communities we serve.
Okay. We're gonna go to Honorable Barbo Ments. Thank
You. I'm just gonna ask
a couple of questions around, uh,
Prudential supervision, particularly given that, um, one
of the committee's recommendations,
which you cover in your memo was
to set up a Prudential policy committee,
and you recognized
that the Reserve Bank have done steps towards this,
but you were also, um, you,
you questioned whether they've gotten to the point
where it's similar to the monetary policy committee.
Just want you to sort of, um, provide a bit more information
as to how you got to that assessment.
Like what exactly would the non deposit,
non-bank deposit take it?
What exactly would you like
to see in a Prudential policy committee?
Um, it's a good question in terms of the detail of
what we would request, what,
what we've said in our commission, in, in our submission is,
um, you know, 1, 1, 1 example is, you know,
how we can actually provide direct input into the policy,
um, committee itself.
So, um, we have a very different business model
to the others in terms of how we operate,
particularly in relation to, you know, our ability to, um,
you know, meet all of the income and compliance standards.
And so one
of the recommendations we've made there
is direct input from us.
So we'd like to see that.
Um, we also think that it's imperative
that that just general principle
of competition should be instilled into that policy mandate.
We have talked a lot to the Reserve Bank about where
competition fits within the DTA
and how the DTA has been structured,
and to some degree that competition principles have been
left to market forces notwithstanding some
of the developments that have come through, such
as the ability to call ourselves a bank.
But it's really about a,
a more granular understanding from any policy,
any committee that's running a, a, a policy as to
how we operate and how we can better
contribute to New Zealand Inc.
Do you have any view on whether we should, uh,
follow Australia a bit more on this
Prudential supervision area?
Look, it's, I think it's, um, it's obviously something
that's been looked at quite closely at the, at the moment.
Um, we don't have any overarching strong views on that, uh,
uh, in other than particularly
how it affects us to be honest.
Um, I think there's a bigger conversation
to be had about the overall banking market
of which we only play a small part.
Okay. Cool. Thank You. Okay.
Any further questions or observations? No. Okay.
Any, uh, closing remarks? Gentlemen, we've got time.
No, we just thank you for your time
and thank you for your continued interest in our sector.
Okay. Hey, thank you so much for, for coming, uh,
and appearing before us today
and for your, um, submission back to us six months on.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Okay, members, that just about ends the um, uh, session
for this morning.
I've just got there a motion on notice.